# A Finite Presentation of CNOT-Dihedral Operators

We start the [Applied Category Theory Seminar](http://www.appliedcategorytheory.org/adjoint-school-act-2019/) with a discussion of the paper *A Finite Prsesentation of CNOT-Dihedral Operators* by Matthew Amy, Jianxin Chen and Niel J. Ross.

## Introduction

Algebraic theory of quantum circuits: logical vs reversible gates.
Logical gates (linear maps) have been axiomatised in the ZX and ZW calculi, these form compact closed monoidal categories.
An axiomatisation of unitary circuits, in the form of a symmetric monoidal groupoid, is a harder task. The circuit model for quantum computation is based on the universal set of unitaries $\{CNOT, X, T, H \}$, generating the Clifford+T gate set. Universality here means that we can get arbitrairily close to any $n$-qubit unitary using polynomially many gates.

Algebraic theories for restricted fragments:
* Lafont (2003): affine circuits $\{ CNOT, X \}$
* Selinger (2015): clifford groupoid $\{ CNOT, X, H, T^2 \}$

Clifford gates are efficiently classical simulatable, the $T$-gate gives universality but is a hard gate to implement in a lab, look for ways of reducing $T$-count.

* May et al. (2013, 2016): phase polynomials for $T$-count optimization in the $\{ CNOT, T\}$ fragment.

In this paper the focus is on CNOT-Dihedral gates, i.e. generated by $\{ CNOT, X, T \}$. It offers a confluence of strategies: groupoid, universal algebra, phase polynomials.

## Summary of the paper

The main idea is to split the gates into two classes: diagonal vs affine gates.

**Generators**

The normal form for affine gates was done by Lafont, by the following lemma all of his work can be imported into this fragment:

**(Lemma)**
Diagonal and affine gates commute.

So the main contribution of the paper is the axiomatisation of diagonal gates in the CNOT-dihedral fragment, this is made easier by the following lemma.

**(Lemma)**
Diagonal gates commute.

The first step towards a normal form is to show that the gates $\{ \omega, T, U, V \} $ generate all diagonal gates in the fragment. They give a small number of relations on these generators which allow to show that they commute with affine gates and between themselves.

The normal form they provide is given by an ordering of the diagonal gates, together with bounds on the number of consecutive gates used, which comes from their representation in terms of phase polynomials. These *degree reductions* are also featured in the axioms and have a direct interpretation in terms of phase polynomial equalities. We will discuss the rules in the following section, and focus on the phase polynomial representations in the third section.


### From ZX to CNOT-Dihedral rules

In order to get an intuition for the presentation given in the paper, we will make a short digression to introduce briefly the ZX calculus. This will allow us to understand the rules exposed in the paper as direct consequences of the underlying rules for logical gates (linear maps) modeled with the ZX calculus. It will also highlight the rules which are not directly derivable from ZX, which we will see come from the phase polynomial formalism.

The ZX calculus is based on (strongly) complementary bases. The generators are
**(ZX generators)**

The basic rules encoding strong complementarity are the bialgebra and hopf laws.

**(ZX rules)**

The CNOT-dihedral fragment can be modelled in ZX, it is given by the following representations of the generators.

**(CNOT-Dihedral gates in ZX)**


**(CNOT-Dihedral rules)**

Discussion of the rules.


## Phase polynomials

The phase polynomial representation of diagonal gates.

reading the phase polynomial from a circuit: understanding rule 9.

Diagonal normal form from phase polynomials

Degree reductions and uniqueness.

## Diagonal gates in ZX: reducing $T$-count with the ZX-calculus.

Rule 13

## Final words

The authors go on to look closer at bicategories of relations inside Grothendieck topoi and abelian categories. Both of these are regular categories, and so fit into the picture we've just painted. However, each have additional properties and structure that compels further study.     

Much of what we have done can be done in greater generality.  For instance, we can drop the local posetal requirement. However, this would greatly complicate matters by requiring non-trivial coherence conditions.
